---
permalink: /research_single/
title: "Research"
---

My research focuses on explaining the behavior of organizations and their top management teams (TMTs) when they are facing existential threats. All TMTs encounter at some point during their tenure a threat that may severely harm the organization, or even lead to bankruptcy. Such harm is different from a mere performance shortfall, as in contrast to a shortfall, it is not possible to (easily) recover from it. What fascinates me is that there is a considerable heterogeneity across TMTs' perceptions of the likelihood that such a fate befalls them, and of what the consequences would be for themselves and their organizations. The inability to notice threats, an erroneous perception, or the lack of a (suitable) response resulted in many organizations being driven to bankruptcy.

In my dissertation, paper one explores how schema affect organizations' ability to shift their focus of attention in response to a crisis. Studying the 2008 crisis in the banking industry, I find that schema help to explain the ease, or difficulty, in which banks reallocate their attention because of the crisis' shock. The second paper contrasts formal ownership with psychological ownership, in which I examine the emotions managers express in response to a failure to meet aspirations, and how this relationships is dependent on the relationship between formal ownership (e.g., owning shares) and feelings of ownership (i.e., psychological ownership). The third chapter aims to explain what verbal communication strategies TMT members use when they face a potential downgrade. By measuring the incongruence between emotions in the tone of their voice and the sentiment in their wording, I found that relying heavily on a specific verbal strategy affects the likelihood of receiving a downgrade. 

To study these topics, I employ a variety of methodologies, particularly focusing on big data tools to uncover the socio-psychological mechanisms underlying the response of the TMT to serious threats to their organization. For instance, how executives strategically use their tone of voice to discuss important topics. For this research, I have collected audio and transcripts for over 60,000 earnings calls from U.S. listed organizations. I developed a variety of algorithms which allow me to determine what was said, who said it, and when it was said. These data allow me to study dynamics during the earning calls, and made it possible for me to construct an effective Deep Neural Network model to classify emotions in the speaker's verbal tone. Furthermore, I have constructed a dataset on the U.S. commercial banking industry, which consists of extensive data on their financials, and information on mortality in the sample. This dataset allows me to investigate what behavior affects the likelihood of bankruptcy and how the threat of bankruptcy affects the bank's behavior.
