---
title: "Formal vs. psychological ownership: A psychological perspective on firm ownership"
collection: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2022-07-01-po-vs-fo
excerpt: ''
date: 2022-07-01
venue: ''
paperurl: ''
citation: 'Berns and Simons (2022)'
---

Firm ownership has an important role in Corporate Governance. However, how firm ownership affects CEO behavior is remains an open question, as this literature is characterized by mixed findings. We contrast the economic aspects of firm ownership (formal ownership) with the socio-psychological feelings of ownership (psychological ownership) to examine how the two ownership types constitute important and distinct mechanisms that influence CEO behavior. We examine the negative emotions CEOs express when being faced with disappointing performance. This relationship is important as it displays to external audiences how CEOs publicly evaluate their organization’s performance. We theorize that this relationship is strengthened by both ownership types, as additional ownership means that the CEO stands more to lose. Furthermore, we posit that psychological ownership takes precedence over formal ownership, due to psychological ownership being important to firm ownership’s salience, it being more enduring, and as the level of formal ownership generally gives the CEO no additional control rights. Using earnings calls, we measure use Natural Language Processing to measure CEOs’ psychological ownership and contrast it with their formal ownership as moderators of negative performance feedback and negative sentiment. We find support for the main relationship, and that it is strengthened by psychological ownership, and takes precedence over the formal ownership moderation effect. This study contributes to the literature on Corporate Governance, demonstrating how psychological ownership offers an alternative lens to study firm ownership mechanisms. Furthermore, we show how these ownership types moderate the main relationship, and lastly, how a computational approach can be used to measure CEOs’ psychological ownership.

<i>Keywords</i>: Psychological ownership, Firm ownership, Decision-making, Emotions, Chief Executive Officer.
